Adek identified five categories of families who can benefit from the education support.

Parents who are struggling because of job loss, unpaid leave or salary cut because of the Covid-19 crisis can benefit from Abu Dhabi's school fees support programme, according to authorities.



The Authority of Social Contribution, Ma'an, on Sunday announced that it will use the funds contributed to its 'Together We Are Good' programme to help families and individuals most in need across four key areas: Education, food supplies, health support and basic needs.



Ma'an, with the support of Abu Dhabi's Department of Education and Knowledge (Adek), called on those seeking assistance for education support to call a hotline or register their request for relief on a specially created microsite.



According to officials, the fund is for parents with children attending private schools in Abu Dhabi who are affected by the current economic challenges. It will support parents by paying school fees or providing devices for distance learning.



Adek has sent out a circular to private schools operating in the emirate, in which it identified the categories of parents who can benefit from the social support programme for education after being directly affected by the Covid-19 crisis and unable to pay school fees.



In the circular, Adek identified five categories of families who can benefit from the education support. These include those parents who have been directly affected by the Covid-19 crisis through loss of jobs, unpaid leave or those whose salaries have been temporarily or permanently cut. The category also includes families that have huge debts and those who are self-employed but their businesses have been badly affected by the Covid-19 crisis and are unable to pay school fees or provide education gadgets to their kids.



Adek asked the affected families to submit their applications for education support with documents that show that they were really affected by the repercussions of the current situation: termination letters, approved documents for unpaid leave and documents that show salary cuts.



Self-employed parents are required to submit commercial licences of their businesses, financial statements for the year 2019, and bank statements of the establishment for the period from January to March 2020.



A sigh of relief for parents



A family of six, including four children, heaved a sigh of relief after Adek announced the support measures.



"This comes as a big relief. I have four kids. I am working on half my pay now," said Indian expat K.S.



"I have not paid school fees for the last term and I was worried if my kids will be shamed or suspended. Also, I read about the relief measures for food and basic requirements. And rent is also covered. These measures are a ray of hope."



The authority indicated that the support includes paying school fees or obtaining laptops or tablets, noting that the families of students who need support can call the toll-free hotline at 800-3088 or via the website http://togetherwearegood.ae.



The closing date for fee assistance applications is April 23.



ismail@khaleejtimes.com
