Struggling families can apply to receive financial support to pay school fees, the Abu Dhabi government said on Sunday.

A public fund worth tens of millions of dirhams was set up to help parents who have seen wages cut or jobs lost.

The programme extends to cash for food and help with rent, if needed.

The 'Together We Are Good' drive is being run by the Authority of Social Contribution - Ma'an, with the support of Abu Dhabi's Department of Education and Knowledge (Adek).

Many parents are now more than ever facing challenges in paying school fees due to a short-term loss of income or unemployment Sara Musallam, Department of Education and Knowledge

The fund is for "parents with children attending private schools in Abu Dhabi who are affected by the current economic challenges, by paying school fees or providing devices for distance learning," Abu Dhabi Government Media Office said.

Families can apply for support with education expenses, healthcare, food, basic needs by contacting Ma'an on 800-3088 or by visiting http://togetherwearegood.ae.

The closing date for applications is 23rd April 2020. The programme also provides for families who need essential devices for their children such as tablets or laptops.

"We recognise that in the current circumstances, some families may require special support," said Adek chairperson Sara Musallam.

"Many parents are now more than ever facing challenges in paying school fees due to a short-term loss of income or unemployment. In these unprecedented times, it is only right that we extend a helping hand to support them."

In other developments, a top judge reiterated a new law that compels firms laying off staff to pay the 'housing allowance' part of the employee's salary until they find a new job or leave the country.

Abdulla Al Nuaimi, head of the Abu Dhabi Labour Court, urged anyone who was denied the settlement to contact the labour court in their emirate. His court has dealt with 400 claims since the crisis began, he said.

Also on Sunday, the UAE government said it was considering measures against countries that have refused to allow expats to return home. Officials did not state which countries were being considered.

.@maanabudhabi’s ‘Together We Are Good’ programme, in collaboration with @ADEK_tweet, will support parents with children attending private schools in #AbuDhabi who are affected by the current economic challenges, by paying school fees or providing devices for distance learning. pic.twitter.com/8RD0liJvPh — مكتب أبوظبي الإعلامي (@admediaoffice) April 12, 2020

In Abu Dhabi, Adek said parents should apply through the website listed and then contact their school. They will also have to provide proof of loss of earnings.

Employees who have taken a pay cut or unpaid leave will have to submit proof of a change in salary, in the form of bank statements and letter from their employer.

If they have lost their job, a copy of the termination letter would have to be submitted. Self-employed residents would have to submit financial statements showing the impact on earnings from January to March.

The fund was made possible by donations from private individuals and from public and private sector companies.

Among them were members of the royal family, including Sheikh Sultan bin Hamdan, who pledged Dh20 million, the government media office said.

Ma'an can accept donations small and large through a text message, WhatsApp and phone number service.

“I continue to be humbled by the generosity of spirit and kindness from individuals and organisations across Abu Dhabi who have contributed to ‘Together We Are Good’," said Salama Al Ameemi, director general of Ma’an.

"Every day, we are receiving offers of assistance from all sectors – both public and private – and each contribution is highly valued and appreciated. As this partnership shows, your contributions are making a real difference to the lives of people across Abu Dhabi.”

Many families have become reliant on support from charities and community groups in recent weeks.

Shukoor Ali Kallungal, president of the Kerala Muslim Cultural Centre in Abu Dhabi, said his organisation has taken 50 to 100 calls each day.

The group delivered 10 tonnes of food to about 1,500 families who have suffered lost earnings in the past two weeks.

Many were sales employees in stores and for suppliers, while others ran small businesses selling mobile phones, textiles and watch repair.

“Many work on a commission basis and have targets that they cannot meet [while their employer is closed] so with no commission, their income is zero. This is the on-the-ground reality," he said.

"We will ask them to contact the government number for help. This is a humanitarian gesture and is highly appreciated.”

Edgar Bacason, who co-ordinates programmes supported by the Philippines Embassy, said help from the relief fund was much needed, and knew of families in which both husband and wife are out of work.

There are people who were between jobs before the virus attacked and who would hire them now Edgar Bacason

“It is a very tight situation families are facing and we are going to need as much as help as we can get,” he said.

“There are people who were between jobs before the virus attacked and now they too need assistance. Their chance of getting employed is much less, if not zero, because who would hire them now?”

Monica Malik, chief economist at Abu Dhabi Commercial Bank, said the relief fund was important "as it directly supports households impacted".

She said any financial relief for households and businesses could prevent "a more marked and extended economic downturn from a secondary round effect from Covid-19".

Those who wish to contribute financially to the fund can send SMS messages to 6670 (Dh1000), 6678 (Dh500), 6683 (Dh100) and 6658 (Dh50). They can also call 8005-MAAN for volunteering and financial contributions above Dh1,000.

A fruit vendor with his watermelons at the Abu Dhabi Fruits and Vegetables Market during the Coronavirus epidemic. Victor Besa / The National Abu Dhabi Civil Defence and Police sterilisation drive in Mussafah. Victor Besa / The National A vegetable vendor fixes his gloves at the Abu Dhabi Fruits and Vegetables Market during the Coronavirus epidemic. Victor Besa / The National A key worker wears a facemask as he walks passed a brightly coloured mural in Media City, Dubai. Chris Whiteoak / The National A deserted part of JBR, Dubai. Chris Whiteoak / The National A digger does some work on an empty Jumeirah beach, this is normally a very popular spot for beach goers, Dubai. Chris Whiteoak / The National Abu Dhabi Civil Defence and Police sterilisation drive in Mussafah. Victor Besa / The National A poster on Sheikh Zayed Road shows a family wearing facemasks tell people to Stay at home, Dubai. Chris Whiteoak / The National A man walks past fishing boats in Ajman wearing a mask amid the coronavirus crisis. Chris Whiteoak / The National A market worker boxes up fish at Ras Al Khaimah's dock. Antonie Robertson / The National Empty streets in RAK as residents stay home for a third week. Antonie Robertson / The National Residents of the Northern Emirates must stay home from 8pm to 6am, but can leave home to shop for essentials outside of those times. Antonie Robertson / The National A sign outside Dubai Parks and Resorts offers support to frontline workers. Chris Whiteoak / The National No entry signs at the closed Corniche in Abu Dhabi. Victor Besa / The National A street cleaner sanitises gutters at Marina Mall car park in Abu Dhabi. Victor Besa / The National The normally busy beaches of Abu Dhabi have been deserted in recent weeks. Victor Besa / The National A shopper picks up essentials at Carrefour in Dubai's Ibn Battuta Mall. Dubai residents must apply for a permit to leave home. Chris Whiteoak / The National The only vehicles on Dubai's roads are delivery trucks, bike couriers and minibuses taking essential personnel to and from work. Victor Besa / The National The empty Al Maktoum Road near Deira Clock Tower in Dubai. It would normally be one of the city's busiest streets. Pawan Singh / The National A 24-hour stay-home order and the disinfecting of streets has left Dubai streets mostly deserted. Pawan Singh / The National The famous Deira Clock Tower at the heart of the city's old town. Pawan Singh / The National The bridge to Meydan hotel and racecourse stands empty on Saturday evening. Reem Mohammed / The National A shopkeeper waits outside his dress store in Al Ain. Chris Whiteoak / The National An ambulance on a street in Al Ain. Chris Whiteoak / The National A quiet street leads to Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Grand mosque in Al Ain. Chris Whiteoak / The National The empty bridge to Meydan during daytime. Reem Mohammed / The National Dubai residents must remain indoors at all times, unless they have a permit for essential shopping. Reem Mohammed / The National Residents queue outside a supermarket in the Muraqqabat area of Deira in Dubai. Pawan Singh / The National A customer enters a pharmacy in Dubai. Pharmacies and supermarkets are the only stores allowed to remain open to the public. Pawan Singh / The National A man rides his bike across the street in Al Ain. Chris Whiteoak / The National A medical worker in a booth prepares to swab residents at a drive-through test centre in the Dubai suburb of Khawaneej. AFP Dubai skyline during lockdown. Antonie Robertson / The National A man takes a taxi after leaving the Business Bay Metro station, Dubai. Antonie Robertson / The National An awareness board on Meydan road, Dubai. Antonie Robertson / The National The empty Kite Beach area of Dubai. Antonie Robertson / The National A healthcare worker crosses an empty street in Bur Dubai while wearing a mask amid the coronavirus outbreak. Chris Whiteoak / The National A gentleman crosses an empty street in Oud Metha in Dubai. Chris Whiteoak / The National Men in face mask walking by nurseries in Warsan. Reem Mohammed / The National
