A round-up of major developments related to Covid-19 across the country.

Here's a round-up of all the latest Covid-19 developments you need to know:

UAE reports 603 new Covid-19 cases, 1,277 recoveries



The UAE Ministry of Health and Prevention on Wednesday reported 603 new cases of the Covid-19 coronavirus, along with 1,277 new recoveries. The total number of cases in the country has now reached 40,507 and the total recoveries has reached 24,017. Those who received the stem cell treatment recovered in 7 days, three times faster than those receiving conventional treatment. One death was also announced as a result of the illness, bringing the total number of deaths in the country to 284. The ministry has called on the public to abide by the precautionary measures in place and follow all necessary medical advice in order to avoid more infections.

UAE one of safest countries in the world for Covid-19: Report



The UAE is among the safest countries worldwide for Covid-19, according to a comprehensive report released this week. The Deep Knowledge Group, a group of commercial and non-profit organisations, has produced a 250-page dossier in which it assesses and ranks 100 countries according to their response to the pandemic. The UAE ranks number 11 behind New Zealand and South Korea but ahead of Canada and Hong Kong. Neighbouring Saudi Arabia ranks number 15 on the list, followed by Kuwait at 21, Bahrain at 23 and Oman at 33. Various factors have been taken into account in the report, including quarantine and government efficiency, as well as monitoring, detection and health preparedness. Switzerland and Germany are the first and second safest countries respectively, the report claims, particularly in light of their economic resilience.

Dubai World Trade Centre to resume events, exhibitions in second half of 2020

Dubai World Trade Centre is gearing up to resume events and exhibitions in the second half of the year, said Helal Saeed Almarri, director-general, Dubai World Trade Centre Authority (DWTCA) and Dubai's Department of Tourism and Commerce Marketing. Upcoming events will be conducted in a highly-controlled manner to ensure adherence to the strictest health and safety protocols for public wellbeing.

App offers UAE healthcare workers free rent for up to two months



A smart app for renting homes is giving UAE healthcare workers discounts on rent - including one to two months free on some listings -in recognition of their efforts in the country's fight against Covid-19. Urban, a proptech company, announced on Wednesday that it has waived its five per cent service fee for healthcare workers who want to rent via its platform, "potentially saving them thousands of dirhams depending on the value of their rental contract". Some landlords also agreed to offer frontliners free rent for one to two months as part of the initiative, Urban said. "Frontline healthcare workers are the heroes of this crisis and deserve every praise and support, particularly during these difficult times. We hope that our small gesture of appreciation goes a long way in making their search for a new home easier while minimising the risk posed by traditional house-hunting practices," said Tala Nsouli, general manager of Urban.

Asymptomatic patients don't spread Covid-19? UAE official clarifies



Social media rumours about asymptomatic Covid-19 patients not spreading the infection is not backed by research, a top UAE official has said. "This is a new disease and there have been limited studies. We need to continue taking precautions, wear masks, and act as if everyone may be infected," said Dr Farida Al Hosani, official spokesperson for the UAE Health Sector. During the virtual Press briefing about developments related to Covid-19 on Wednesday, Amna Al Dhahak Al Shamsi, UAE Government spokesperson, said the world is seeing "positive indicators". "But that doesn't mean the pandemic is over and that we can fully return to normal life. It is our responsibility to continue adhering to the precautions while adapting to a new lifestyle."

Two more Covid-19 screening clinics opened

Tawam Hospital in Al Ain has announced the launch of two mobile Covid-19 screening clinics for individuals that show symptoms of the novel coronavirus. The hospital - an Abu Dhabi Health Services Company, SEHA, facility - noted that the clinics are stationed in two different locations. The first clinic is based opposite Al Jimi Malla, while the second is found in Al Ain's Hili Industrial Zone. Tawam Hospital's Executive Director of Operations, Yousef Al Ketbi, said that the setting up of the two clinics are part of the precautionary measures set out by SEHA to mitigate the further spread of the coronavirus. The clinic located opposite Al Jimi Mall is open for testing seven days a week from 12:00pm to 7:00pm. The second clinic, Al Ketbi continued, is also available seven days a week, with operating times beginning 10:00am till 5:00pm. The Department of Health - Abu Dhabi (DoH), in coordination with the Advanced Technology Research Council, has launched a unified website to support research and developments efforts in the fight against Covid-19, facilitating scientific discoveries to tackle the virus.

How an 81-year-old Emirati made a miraculous recovery



It was the willpower, cheerful disposition and timely medical intervention that saved the life of an 81-year-old Emirati who tested positive for Covid-19. Doctors at Al Zahra Hospital, Sharjah, lauded the presence of mind and positivity of RSR that helped him bounce back to life after spending 18 days in the hospital and testing negative for the virus. He was the oldest patient to recover from the deadly virus from the hospital. Sharjah resident RSR, who has history of hypertension, said he started experiencing mild chest pain and was rushed to the emergency room at Al Zahra Hospital with breathing difficulties, nausea, cough and also difficulty in swallowing.

All you need to know about Covid-19 on new UAE website



The new platform, called the 'National Registry for Covid-19', is now available at DoH's website dedicated to providing real-time updates on Covid-19. It will also highlight the vital role scientific research plays in order to better understand the pandemic, the nature of the virus and how to fight it, as well as identify the best tools to treat and reduce the side-effects of Covid-19. The platform aims to collect all the research activities from across different sectors and concerned parties by encouraging further research and minimising duplication of data for efficiency. Through its unified digital platform, the DoH will also archive all research related to the SARS-CoV-2, the strain of coronavirus that causes Covid-19, which may provide valuable insights into the virus as part of ongoing scientific research.

Dubai-based Indian businessman to charter free flight for distressed expats



A Dubai-based businessman has chartered a flight from Sharjah to Kochi in Kerala to send back his employees for free. A total of 125 employees will be repatriated on an Air Arabia aircraft carrying 168 passengers to India on June 15, according to R Harikumar, managing director of Elite Group of Companies. "There will be 168 passengers. The remaining passengers will be identified by the All Kerala College Alumni Forum (Akcaf) Covid-19 task force," Harikumar told Khaleej Times. Along with free air tickets, the passengers will also be provided PPE kits including face masks, gloves, face shield, protective overalls, and hand sanitisers. "I have received state government approvals for the upcoming flight and is now awaiting permissions from Indian central government," he said.



D1m fund for UAE publishers to combat pandemic



An emergency fund worth Dh1 million has been launched for UAE publishers to cope with the impact of Covid-19. The Emirates Publishers Emergency Fund, established by the Emirates Publishers Association (EPA), will support publishers whose businesses have been severely impacted by the outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic. Sheikha Bodour bint Sultan Al Qasimi, EPA founder and president, said the fund objectives will be achieved in partnership with the Sharjah Book Authority (SBA) and Sharjah Publishing City (SPC). "The EPA will coordinate with Emirati bookmakers and guide them on ways to avail of the provisions included in the fund. The fund aims to reach affected publishers operating within the country, and by identifying the complex challenges the industry is grappling with, it will further boost efforts to ensure the continuity of their businesses," said Sheikha Bodour.

Isolators installed in Ras Al Khaimah driving school vehicles to prevent coronavirus spread



Planning to take driving lessons in Ras Al Khaimah? Customers and instructors must adhere to strict coronavirus safety measures under new guidelines, while they are now separated by an isolator screen. Isolators in cars have been installed in training cars at RAK's driving institutes to prevent Covid-19 spread. The decision is in line with the ongoing preventive measures to curb infection and transmission, according to Major-General Ali Abdullah bin Alwan Al Nuaimi, General Commander of the RAK Police. "All driving lessons are now taken in vehicles where transparent isolators are fitted to separate the trainee from the trainer, and ensure their safety."

UAE economic recovery to begin in H2, says Central Bank



The UAE Central Bank expects economic recovery to begin in the second-half of this year after it has been hit by the coronavirus pandemic. "While recovery of economic activity is projected to commence in the second half of the year, recovery of economic sentiment will hinge on deploying policy support measures. The Targeted Economic Support Scheme (TESS) by CBUAE and the economic stimulus packages announced by both local and federal governments are likely to weigh in positively on the Purchasing Managers' Index, real estate prices, employment and credit growth with a positive impact on the overall sentiment once the virus risks are under control," the apex bank said in its first-quarter 2020 report released on Wednesday.

Will video calls remain free after Covid-19, FNC asks Etisalat, du



The Federal National Council (FNC) members on Wednesday asked the telecommunications regulator whether video call apps will continue to be free after the nation overcomes the Covid-19 pandemic. However, no clear answer was given as the parties "authorised to respond" didn't attend the virtual meeting. FNC member Aisha Al Yateem raised a question to representatives of the Telecommunications Regulatory Authority (TRA) and telecom companies Etisalat and du about the future of Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) calls. Representatives from Etisalat and du, however, did not attend the meeting and sent through their apologies. TRA representatives told the members that they were not the authority responsible for VoIP apps and therefore not the authorised party to answer the question. The TRA, in coordination with the UAE telecom operators, had in March announced the availability of several applications for free as school learning went online and residents worked from home.





You can now set up caravans on Dubai's Sufouh Beach once again



Residents can now set up their caravans on Dubai's Sufouh Beach once again, the municipality has announced. The Dubai Media Office tweeted on Wednesday: "@DMunicipality announces that caravan camping will be re-authorised on Sufouh Beach. Beachgoers must obtain an online camping permit provided through the Dubai Municipality website." Campers must adhere to all precautionary measures like wearing a face mask and social distancing. Al Sufouh beach is the only one in the emirate designated for camping activities. Earlier this year, the municipality had made caravan camping on the beach free. Previously, campers had to pay a Dh500 fee for securing a permit.

Chinese expats in UAE help those impacted by coronavirus pandemic



Around 400 Chinese expatriates, teaming up with the UAE Red Crescent Authority, have donated cash and other materials worth Dh150,000 to help the Covid-affected. Many of them have also volunteered and distributed around 4,000 health kits to the needy across Dubai. The community handed out the charity and kits to show gratitude towards the UAE for being their second home and providing them a safe haven during the time of the global pandemic. Dr Yousuf Shaojin Chai, coordinator of activities of the Chinese volunteer group, said: "We have formed an online support group called Chinese Goodwill Wechat Group and we started work by volunteering in Deira area from April when the lockdown in Al Ras and Naif areas was announced. This was done in collaboration with the UAE Red Crescent Authority."

Phase 8 of sanitisation drive, Covid-19 testing in Abu Dhabi's Musaffah starts today



Phase 8 of the sanitisation programme and Covid-19 testing in the Musaffah area of Abu Dhabi will begin today with Block 17. The programme is being implemented by the Department of Health - Abu Dhabi, in partnership with relevant entities. This comes after the success of the first seven phases of the campaign, Abu Dhabi Media Office revealed in a series of tweets. They said: "Residents welcomed the procedures, and expressed their appreciation for the efforts being made to protect their health and safety. Daily commercial activities will continue as usual. Entry and exit will be restricted while the area is being sanitised.
