German President Frank-Walter Steinmeier on Wednesday accredited the new Emirati ambassador to Germany, Hafsa Al Ulama, at Berlin's Bellevue Palace.

Mr Steinmeier conveyed his compliments to the UAE leadership before wishing Ms Al Ulama success in her work to strengthen relations between the two countries.

He stressed Germany's readiness to provide all possible support to help her perform her duties.

Ms Al Ulama expressed her pride in representing the UAE in Germany, and her eagerness to boost ties between the two countries.

I.E Hafsa AlUlama überreicht dem deutschen Bundespräsidenten Dr. Frank-Walter Steinmeier ihr Beglaubigungsschreiben als Botschafterin der #VAE 🇦🇪in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland 🇩🇪 im Schloss Bellevue in #Berlin.@MoFAICUAE pic.twitter.com/GHNML2HMiC — UAE Embassy in Berlin (@UAEinBerlin) June 10, 2020

She was previously the UAE ambassador to Brazil and its head of mission to Montenegro.

Ms Al Ulama was also managing director of Abu Dhabi Capital Group, and held significant positions in the Ministry of Economy and Planning and Citibank UAE, where she became the first Emirati woman to be appointed the bank's vice president.

She holds a bachelor's degree in economics from San Diego State University and a master's in analysis, design and management of information systems from London School of Economics and Political Science.

At the end of last month, Germany’s Foreign Ministry hailed the UAE’s diplomatic acuity, after Dr Sultan Al Jaber, Minister of State and the UAE’s Special Envoy to Germany, spoke with politicians and officials by video link.

H.E Hafsa AlUlama presents to the German Federal President, Dr. Frank-Walter Steinmeier, her credentials as ambassador of the #UAE 🇦🇪 to the Federal Republic of Germany 🇩🇪 at Bellevue Palace in the German capital #Berlin.@MoFAICUAE pic.twitter.com/PKm6upAu9e — UAE Embassy in Berlin (@UAEinBerlin) June 10, 2020

In a tweet, Christian Buck, director for the Mena region at Germany’s Foreign Ministry, welcomed the way the UAE was helping to progress virtual diplomacy.

“This is taking virtual diplomacy to a whole new level: UAE Minister of State Dr Sultan Al Jaber visiting Berlin and discussing a wide range of issues with key actors in the German government and parliament, including his counterpart Minister of State, Niels Annen," Mr Buck said.

Germany is the UAE’s largest European trading partner and accounts for almost 22 per cent of all trade with the Arab world, figures from last year showed.

Non-oil trade between the UAE and Germany increased 60 per cent from 2010 to 2017, reaching $13.45 billion (Dh49.4bn) by the end of that period, government data showed.

Several of Germany's biggest companies have a presence in the UAE, including conglomerate Siemens, chemicals company BASF and oil and gas producer Wintershall.
