Meet notable Pakistani entrepreneurs who continue to enrich the UAE's business environment

Al Zaki Engineering and Contracting Company

Al Zaki Engineering and Contracting Company is a forward-thinking, energetic and dynamic firm founded in Abu Dhabi in 1981 by Syed Abdul Razzaq. It specialises in the business of Construction, Interior Décor and General Maintenance. The main office is in Abu Dhabi Island on Khalifat Street, while other offices are located in Dubai and Mussafah. Al Zaki is ISO 9001:2015, ISO 14001:2015, and ISO 45001:2018 certified.

Over the years the company has undertaken many challenging projects of constructing, refurbishment, fit-out and interior décor. Al Zaki offers unique engineering solutions in construction and maintenance and have highly skilled professionals. Al Zaki staff includes a diverse team of engineers, architects, technicians and highly trained labour force. We believe that investment in a sincere and dedicated team will provide value to a professional and responsible practice. At Al Zaki, we are committed to conducting our business in a way that establishes and maintains client satisfaction.





Emirates Neon Group

Started in 1971, the Emirates Neon Group is a leading signage and communications company in the UAE, having modern manufacturing facilities manned by an experienced management team and highly skilled manpower. Over the last 49 years, it has expanded from a traditional signage company into diverse visual communication, infrastructure solutions and media group with a footprint of factories and offices across 14 different countries in the GCC, Africa, and Asia region, including China, Pakistan, Kuwait, and Oman.

The Chairman Hanif Merchant has nurtured this family-owned business building it into one of the most successful visual communication companies across the Middle East. The company utilises new media solutions and the latest technology to set unique trends and continue to thrive in the outdoor media industry. ENG has various business divisions where it serves the needs of our local and international clients such as Outdoor/Indoor Media, Signage and Projects, Digital Signage Solutions, Digital Print Division, Traffic Sign Division, Aluminum Casting & Fabrication Division, Steel Fabrication Division, Signage and Graphics Way Finding Consultancy, and Service & Maintenance Division. ENG - where the brightest ideas are born



The Health Bank (THB)



The Health Bank provides a wide range of healthcare services, from global health management memberships, wellness and lifestyle services, to clinical services for home care and after care. Our services include:

Global care: Booking doctors, keeping your health records up to date, access to a 24/7 doctor on Phone, second opinion from the best hospitals, and international medical concierge services.

DXH smart care: Medical tourism membership co-created with Dubai Health Experience (DXH) to manage all incoming medical tourism needs.

Aesthetic care: Access to the best in anti-aging and aesthetics in the US, UK, and Middle East.

Genetic care: Quick and comprehensive DNA Testing (for nutrition, fitness, genetic predispositions, and skin) at a great price with DNA results in less than a week.

Weight-loss: A programme with dedicated dietitian, telemonitoring, and DNA to transform lifestyles.

THB home health care: Home care and after care services.

Whether you require preventative care, the best services in aesthetics and anti-aging, or management of chronic conditions or pain management, The Health Bank is here to provide you with a true continuum of care.

For more information, contact +971-4-557 3508 or www.thbglobal.com



Al Ibrahimi Group of Restaurants



I would like to congratulate all Pakistanis residing in the UAE and all over the world on this historic day. Our forefathers sacrificed their lives for freedom, and we shouldn't forget them. Allah has blessed Pakistan with many delights. On this glorious day we must not forget the UAE, where more than 1.3 million Pakistanis live, work and serve the nation.

As Pakistanis, we have to show our commitment to the country that has provided so many employment opportunities for us. Every expat must abide by the law and respect the local culture and values.

We urge the leadership in Pakistan to further strengthen relations with the UAE because during the difficult days this nation and its Rulers have stood by Pakistan.

We pay rich tribute to the Rulers of the UAE for their great vision and progressive policies. Pakistan policy makers should follow the UAE's example. We pray to Almighty Allah for prosperity and development in Pakistan. We should respect everyone and all Pakistanis must adopt patience, tolerance and endurance. Pakistan is growing and Insha'Allah we will soon overcome the challenges we are currently facing.

Pakistan Zindabaad, Pak-Emirates friendship, Painda Baad.



TIME ELECTRO & CONTRACTING CO. WLL



TIME ELECTRO & CONTRACTING COMPANY WLL was established in 1989 in the UAE. The owner of the company is Abdul Aziz Chohan. He is leading the company as a Managing Director. An expert in Overhead Transmission Line, Chohan has strived hard and taken Time Electro to new heights with complete dedication and personal involvement. The company is recognised by all utilities companies in the UAE as one of the best establishments that is committed to quality, quantity and total customer satisfaction. It has achieved several quality and safety awards to its credit.

Currently, Time Electro is a leading construction company in the UAE. It offers quality services in High Voltage Electrical works from 33 kV up to 400 kV, Medium and High Voltage Power Distribution. It also has expertise in Mechanical and Civil works (supply, installation, testing & commissioning of HV/LV Power Distribution Equipment, Underground Cable, Overhead Lines, Street Lighting, Telecommunication Towers and Associated Civil Works on-shore and off-shore sites including oil and gas field areas). Besides, the company has its own resources for HV/AC Testing and VLF Testing from 11, 33 132, 220 & 400 kV. It is certified by ISO 9001:2015, OSHAS and Environmental Safety.



Dr Muhammad Farhan



I have been working as a Family Medicine Physician for more than two decades. Graduated from Dow University of Health Sciences and working in the UAE public sector. I am currently associated with non-profitable medical projects, Apna Clinic, Diabetes Clinic and Indus Hospital Support back home, serving the poor and needy for chronic disease management and other infectious diseases.

Needless to say, any role that the Pakistani diaspora contributes in this regard is highly valued for the welfare of our brothers and sisters in Pakistan.

I am associated with the Pakistan Business Professional Council as VP of Membership and Executive Member of Overseas Pakistanis Advisory Council (OPF). I have been working through various platforms to enhance the soft image of the 'Emerging Pakistan' brand.

On this landmark day in history, I would like to thank the UAE for its steadfast support to Pakistan. UAE and Pakistan Friendship Zindabad.



Alliott Hadi Shahid Chartered Accountants



Alliott Hadi Shahid is a leading firm of Chartered Accountants, Auditors and Business Advisors in the UAE since 1976. We are a member of Alliott Group, and marked by our commitment to provide cost-effective, reliable timely delivery and high-quality professional service. We assure our clients are guided professionally and given appropriate professional advice toward the development and growth of their businesses. Alliott Hadi Shahid are experts in:

. Audit & Assurance

. Accounting / Bookkeeping

. Business Plan

. Business Valuation

. Company Formation

. Due Diligence

. Internal Audit

. US Tax Consultancy

. VAT Consultancy

. VAT General Services

Considering the economic challenges in the UAE, Alliott UAE offers one meeting free consultancy on Cash Financial Management, Business Restructuring, Budgeting, Monthly Accounting and Taxation.



Tawasul Insurance Services, LLC



Tawasul Insurance Services, LLC was established in May 2006 in Abu Dhabi. Tawasul is registered with the Department of Economic Development - Abu Dhabi, Chamber of Commerce and Industry. It has been one of the prominent insurance brokers since its inception, offering personal and commercial lines of insurance. Tawasul is known for its consistent and excellent financial results. However, in a professional service industry like ours, the ultimate test should always be client service. We have a culture that is passionate about putting our client first. As the broker to disavow contingents and refuse supplemental compensation, Tawasul has taken an unwavering stand on acting in the best interests of the client.




