Top stories of the day: Emirates denies rumours of staff committing suicide; 30% of Sharjah govt employees to return to work on Sunday; US tops 2m coronavirus cases

Here is a digest of some of the top stories over the past 24 hours.

30% of Sharjah government employees to return to work from Sunday

Around 30 per cent of the Sharjah government employees will resume work from offices on Sunday, the Sharjah Human Resources Directorate has announced.

However, pregnant women, people with special needs as well as those with chronic ailments and immune deficiencies, according to approved medical reports, are excluded from returning to the workplace depending on the nature of their work.

In addition to the employees above 60 years, female employees who have school-going children in the ninth grade or below have been exempted until the end of the current academic year.

Fake news: Emirates denies rumours of staff committing suicide



Dubai's Emirates airline on Thursday rubbished rumours that five of its employees have committed suicide. According to rumours floating on some sections of social media, five Emirates employees allegedly committed suicide in Silicon Oasis.



According to another, equally false post, three staff - a pilot and two cabin crew members - have taken the extreme step. Reacting to a post on Twitter, the airline said: "We can confirm that the news is untrue and request not to spread rumours."

UAE one of safest countries in the world for Covid-19



The UAE is among the safest countries worldwide for Covid-19, according to a comprehensive report released by the Deep Knowledge Group.

The UAE ranks number 11 behind New Zealand and South Korea but ahead of Canada and Hong Kong. Saudi Arabia ranks number 15 on the list, followed by Kuwait at 21, Bahrain at 23 and Oman at 33.

The group has produced a 250-page dossier in which it assesses and ranks 100 countries according to their response to the pandemic.

UAE, India discuss effective partnership in fighting Covid-19



Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, reviewed the prospects of further consolidating the strong bonds of cooperation between the UAE and India, with Subrahmanyam Jaishankar, Minister of External Affairs for the Government of India.



In a video call, the two top diplomats covered the global fight against Covid-19 and the exchange of expertise between the two countries, including their application of state-of-the-art technology in the early detection of the novel virus. They exchanged condolences over the virus-related deaths and stressed the necessity of bolstering joint action in combatting the pandemic.

Emirates announces four flights to Cairo to help Egyptians get home



To help stranded Egyptians get home, Emirates plans to operate four flights between Dubai and Cairo on June 14,18,19 and 21.



Customers can also connect to these flights in Dubai from any destination on Emirates' current network of 30 destinations in the GCC, Asia Pacific, Europe and the Americas. Flights can be booked on emirates.com, via travel agents, Emirates sales office and contact centre.

No acquisition of 1.5% stake by US-based bank: Emirates NBD

Emirates NBD Bank has said that 101,731,408 shares were purchased by 254 unique investors on May 28, 2020, following a press clipping indicating that the US-based Bank of America had acquired a 1.5 per cent stake in Emirates NBD.



In a statement published on the Dubai Financial Market website, the Dubai-based bank explained, "The largest purchase by one single investor was 10,116,892 shares on this date (May 28, 2020)."

UAE, Egypt call for an immediate ceasefire in Libya



Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan, UAE Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, and Sameh Shoukry, Egypt's Foreign Minister, expressed their concern over developments in Libya and the ongoing fighting which undermines regional security and stability.

During the call, Sheikh Abdullah and Shoukry condemned endangering civilian lives by armed groups supported by foreign forces, specially in and around the city of Sirte. They called for an immediate ceasefire and commitment to the political process, under the auspices of the UN and in line with the 'Berlin Process' and 'Cairo Declaration'.

People with O-type blood less likely to test positive for Covid-19, study finds



A new study suggests that a person's susceptibility to contract the Covid-19 and its severity may be linked to their blood type.



Researchers at 23andMe, a genetic testing company, found people with type O blood were up to 18 per cent less likely to test positive for Covid-19 and 26 per cent less likely to contract the virus.



The study involved more than 750,000 participants, including 10,000 who reported having Covid-19, following which it was found that people with O-type blood were between 13 and 26 per cent less likely to test positive. The study found 1.3 per cent with type O blood tested positive while 1.4 per cent with type A blood and 1.5 per cent of people with type B or AB blood had the disease



Ajman's corniche, Zorah beaches to be closed this weekend

The Ajman Corniche Beach and the Al Zorah Area Beach will be partially closed during the weekend.



The crisis management team in the emirate announced that the two venues will be closed from 6am on Friday, June 12, until 6pm on Saturday, June 13.



This is in support of the preventive measures being taken in the emirate to prevent the spread of the Covid-19 coronavirus, and to ensure that the residents remain safe.

All graduation ceremonies via online in Dubai: KHDA

Considering the Covid-19 situation in Dubai, KHDA announced that all graduation ceremonies will be organised online, using the internet and video call technologies.



It said that making graduation ceremonies online is an important precautionary step to stop the spread of coronavirus and protect students and their families.



KHDA also announced that it is inviting final year students from across Dubai to send short videos of their graduation speeches.

Filipino pride goes online with first virtual Independence Day celebrations in UAE



There may be Covid-19 safety measures restricting mass gatherings, but Filipinos in the UAE won't let their Independence Day pass without proving that the kabayan spirit shall shine against all odds.



On Friday, thousands of Filipino expats across the country are expected to tune in to live-stream celebrations, one of which will be capped by the sight of Dubai's Burj Khalifa lighting up in Philippine colours.



US tops two million coronavirus cases: Johns Hopkins

The number of confirmed coronavirus infections in the United States topped two million on Wednesday, according to a tally by Johns Hopkins University.



The pandemic has claimed the lives of more than 112,900 people in the United States, which leads the world in the number of confirmed infections with 2,000,464, according to the Baltimore-based school's latest count.

Video: Christopher Columbus statue beheaded in Boston

A statue of Christopher Columbus in Boston has been beheaded, police said Wednesday, as calls to remove sculptures commemorating colonizers and slavers sweep America on the back of anti-racism protests.



A Columbus statue was also vandalised in downtown Miami, and another was dragged into a lake earlier in the week in Richmond, Virginia, according to local reports.



The incidents come as pressure builds in the United States to rid the country of monuments associated with racism following massive demonstrations over the killing of George Floyd by a white police officer in Minneapolis last month.

PML-N president Shehbaz Sharif tests positive for Covid-19



Shehbaz Sharif, President of the opposition Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N), has tested positive for the novel coronavirus, a party spokesperson confirmed on Thursday.



Sharif, 69, a cancer survivor, was currently isolating at home, Geo News quoted spokesperson Marriyum Aurangzeb as saying, adding that the Leader of Opposition was following his doctors' advice on how to fight the infection.

India denies visas to US panel on religious freedom

India has turned down a travel request for members of a US government panel seeking to review its religious freedom, saying such foreign agencies had no standing to assess the constitutional rights of citizens.

Foreign Minister Subrahmanyam Jaishankar said the government firmly repudiated the surveys of the commission, which had little knowledge of the rights of Indian citizens, describing it as biased and prejudiced. The step was taken because the government saw no grounds for a foreign entity such as the USCIRF to pronounce on the state of Indian citizens' constitutionally protected rights, he added.



Heathrow starts voluntary redundancy scheme

Britain's Heathrow Airport, which before the coronavirus pandemic was the busiest in Europe, said it had started a voluntary redundancy scheme after passenger numbers fell to an all-time low and it could not rule out further job losses.

Heathrow said that passenger numbers in May were down 97 per cent and it was preparing for further declines due to Britain's quarantine rule.

The airport, which has about 7,000 staff, said on Thursday that its employment levels were no longer sustainable and that it had agreed to start voluntary redundancy with unions.

India lifts export ban on hydroxychloroquine

India has lifted an export ban on hydroxychloroquine, the anti-malarial drug touted by US President Donald Trump as a potential "game changer" in the fight against the Covid-19 pandemic, India's minister for chemicals and fertilizers, Sadananda Gowda said.

Manufacturers, except export-oriented units and those in special economic zones, would still have to supply 20 per cent of their production to the domestic market, Gowda said.



Summer might slow coronavirus but is unlikely to stop it, report says



The arrival of warmer weather in the Northern Hemisphere raises the question of whether summer could slow the spread of the coronavirus outbreak. Here is what science says.



While warmer weather typically ends the annual flu season in temperate zones, climate alone has not stopped the Covid-19 pandemic from sweeping any part of the globe. In fact, outbreaks in hot and sunny Brazil and Egypt are growing. Still, recent data about how sunlight, humidity and outdoor breezes affect the virus gives some reason for optimism that summer could slow the spread.

Fans welcome as Djokovic event helps tennis emerge from coronavirus

After being suspended for three months due to the coronavirus pandemic, top-level international tennis returns this weekend in Belgrade with a charity tournament hosted by world number one Novak Djokovic and where fans will be welcome.

The Adria Tour will be held until July 5 in Serbia, Croatia, Montenegro and Bosnia.

On the tournament's first stop, on Saturday and Sunday, the Serbian star will be joined by world number three Dominic Thiem.
